# my 'covid essay'

I don't know why I'm doing this to myself, but I pick fights on twitter. I shouldn't, but when it
comes to public safety and people being literal bio hazards, I cannot stop myself.

Turns out, there are people out there, that speak with full authority trying to argue that you
should only take the vaccine if you're at risk. Over the last couple of days, I was talking to one
specific fellow and this morning I decided to just stop talking to them, because they basically lack
even the high school education necessary to make any coherent argument... and then they accused me
of not making a coherent argument and not 'assuage the evidence based reluctance to being vaccinated
that I \[they\] brought to \[me\]'. That former made something snap in my head, so I'm writing this
twitlonger, because regular twitter just isn't the right format to teach someone basic statistics.

I will, therefor, start with an introduction to how dice work, basics of evolution and how
statistics comes into play. Then I will put this all into context, explaining why the delta variant
was able to show up, even despite vaccines, and then go over things like the possible precedent for
vaccine mandates, why comparing the flu and covid is really dumb, and I will be repeating over and
over again, why this stuff essentially is like rolling dice.

## STATISTICS

Evolution is a game of chance, and because of that tiny detail, statistics is actually essential to
understand how evolution works. We don't need to dive deep into the topic to understand what we need
here, and it's high school level, so it shouldn't be too hard to grasp. I'm going to stay away from
as much lingo as I can to make this easier to digest. For now, just keep in mind that a big part of
evolution is rolling dice and some of those dice results sometimes having significant results.

So let's talk dice. A pretty easy analogy that we're going to use later on is this: Imagine you have
10 six sided dice (and we're assuming that the dice are fair, i.e. not weighted or something like
that), and you're playing a game where the goal is to roll your dice pool once and hope you roll a
single six.  The chance to roll a six on a single die is 1/6 or 16.66..%: You want to roll one
specific number, out of 6 equally distributed possibilities. Easy.

Now, if you have two dice, rolling a single 6 becomes a bit more likely, but the probabilities don't
add additively, i.e. you cannot just add 1/6 + 1/6 = 1/3. Instead, the probability for rolling at
least one six out of those two dice is 30.5% instead of 1/3 = 33.333..%.

If you don't believe me, and/or need a visual representation for this effect, check this out:
https://www.pdx.edu/learning-center/sites/g/files/znldhr3391/files/2020-07/Probability_Dice.pdf
That's a little two slide pdf doc, made by the Learning Center of Portland State University, where
they put a nice little graphic showing all possible outcomes of rolling two dice, and then simply
counting how often at least one 6 appears, and diving that by the number full number of possible
results. You can also simply draw it up yourself, if you don't want to klick random links.

And as it turns out, there 36 possible results, and 11 of those contain at least one 6. So, to the
final probability turns out to be: 11 / 36 = 0.305 = 30.5%. (I hope I don't have to explain how to
go from decimal numbers to percentages...).

What's all this for? This should be obvious, but just to make sure we're on the same page: Rolling
more dice increases your chance to roll that single 6. It will never quite reach 1 or 100%, but it
will slowly increase. For 10 dice, as mentioned earlier, that chance is roughly 83.8%. Thus, the
easiest way for me to reduce your chance to roll that 6 is TAKING AWAY DICE FROM YOUR POOL. This is
the important bit. Absolutely keep this in mind.

Let's talk about evolution...

## EVOLUTION

Mutations are essentially like rolling dice. When DNA is replicating, doesn't matter whether we're
talking about plants, humans, or viruses, errors can happen. Think of it like copying text. Even if
you're careful, you're going to make mistakes. A lot of them are probably being inconsequential, but
sometimes, let's say because you left out a word, you might completely change the meaning of a
sentence. That would be a meaningful mutation.

Mutations in our DNA work pretty much the same way. The mechanism for replication is pretty good,
but it does make mistakes from time to time. Fairly often, safety mechanisms in our cells can catch
these errors and either repair them or have the cell disintegrate. Sometimes things slip through and
even then they might not have any actual effect. But in some very rare cases these mutations can
have a significant effect, either changing some detail about the phenotype (how the DNA expresses
itself, basically how the organism is 'built'), or sometimes leading to cancer.

The wiki page on mutation is a pretty good read on this: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mutation
It lays out most if not all of those mechanism that we know.

The important connection to statistics is this: The occurence of any mutation happens by chance.
Everytime any cell replicates, it rolls dice and if it has a bad (or good) roll, a mutation happens.
What the mutation does, and if it is of any consequence in the first place, is, yet again, ruled by
chance.

The popular example for this are giraffes (we can probably at least agree that giraffes are pretty
dope): Giraffes live in an environment where it is beneficial to them to able to eat fruit and
leaves from the top of trees. So, the longer a giraffe's neck, the less competition it has when
eating. If the giraffe has more to eat, it has a higher likelyhood to live long enough to pass on
its genes to as many children as it can.

Let's say we have two giraffe calves. One of them won the mutation lottery, and probability blessed
it with some mutation that made it's neck ever so slightly longer, giving it slightly better access
to food.

Viruses don't work a whole lot differently in this regard. The main difference is that they cannot
replicate by themselves. Instead, they use their hosts DNA replication facilities. Think of it like
you have some blueprint for a wooden shelf, but no tools, so you 'infiltrate' a carpenter shop and
use their tools to build your shelf without their consent. Many, if not all, viruses in this example
would literally produce so many new shelfs that the carpenter shop literally bursts open, and all
those shelfs are now walking to other carpenter shops and replicate themselves there. Weird analogy,
I know. You can read up on this here: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virus#Replication_cycle

Viruses have DNA, just like us, and the replication process, even if it's done by its host, is also
slightly error-prone, so mutations happen. And, just like with our DNA, a virus' DNA can have
inconsequential and consequantial mutations. Now, a virus' mutation cannot result in a larger neck,
but it can result in slightly changing some protein to make it easier to invade host cells, or to
avoid and resist its host's immune system. This is essentially what the delta variant is: Some lucky
virus was lucky, and something about it changed to make those things easier. This is very very
simplified, but I hope it gets the point across, which is that every time a single virus replicates
(or is replicated by its host), there is a chance, albeit extremely(!) small, that it comes out the
other end with something that makes it more effective. There is also a chance that some of the new
virus individuals are worse off than before; given how complex and sophisticated our immune system
is, I wouldn't be surprised if this was the majority of mutations.

When a individual virus ends up having a beneficial mutation, for example it has an easier time to
invade and take over host cells, evolution happens: That individual will have a higher chance to get
to into another host cell, replicate, and spread that mutation to the new individuals the host cell
creates from that blueprint. This is how these mutations, or variants when they're sufficiently
different from the 'original', can become dominant. They simply replicate slightly more or slightly
more efficient, and then they spread, and spread, and spread, being better at its job than that
'original' virus.

## VIRUSES AND DICE

And here's the thing you've all been waiting for: How is this all connected to dice?

Everytime a new virus is created a giant die is rolled; a single die with an unimaginable number of
sides. Most of those sides do absolute nothing, some of them kill the virus outright, some are
debilitating for the new virus, and some are beneficial to it. The chance for that die to land on
one of those beneficial sides is INCREDIBLY low, simply by virtue of our immune system being so
robust that a mutation exploiting a new weakness is very unlikely. And each new virus only gets to
roll that die a couple of times.

But the thing that a virus can exploit is sheer numbers: By just having an incredible number of
viruses with a chance to roll that die, the virus population suddenly has a sizeable chance to have
it land on one of those sides that result in a beneficial mutation. They simply have a giant dice
pool and combat the incredibly low chance of gaining that benefit.

Let's remember what we discussed in the 'statistics section': There we took the example of having
ten six sided dice, and we want to reduce the chance to roll a single six out of that pool of dice.
The analogy here is that the dice is a new individual virus, and the 6 is its chance to gain a
beneficial mutation; obviously, the absolute numbers don't make sense for viruses, but the
qualitative point still stands: If we want to decrease their chance to roll a six, we need to take
away their dice. Ideally, we leave them with no dice at all, but, as we should all have heard by
now, that is probably going to be absolute impossible when it comes to the corona virus. It's always
going to have some dice left.

## VACCINES

If we want to understand vaccines, we should probably talk about the immune system first. When our
immune system battles a virus, it basically comes up and produces new weaponised cells to fight that
invader on the fly. After overcoming the infection, it will store some of that 'weaponry' in order
to have it at the ready in case that virus invades again.

If you want more details and nice visualisations, check out this kurzgesagt video:
https://youtu.be/lXfEK8G8CUI

What a vaccine does, is that it 'simulates' an infection in some way or another, which prompts the
immune system to build those antibodies, in order to prepare it for when the host actually gets
infected with the real virus. Now, the body does not know that you've only been giving it fake or
dead virus to practise on, and it does not need to know the difference.

This can, in rare cases, lead to side effects. Sometimes it's just being as simple as being tired,
sometimes you get a slight fever which is a sign for your immune system being hard at work (this is
what happened to me after my second dose: I got a slight fever and a headache for day). In very rare
cases, the immune system might 'overreact' and actually damage its own host, which might be where
the more serious vaccine side effects come from, but that's just a personal guess; this is where my
knowledge about the immune system ends, so don't quote me on that. Either way, the chances for these
side effects to occur is incredibly low (
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/vaccines/safety/adverse-events.html ).

The result of being vaccinated is that when you do get infected, your body already knows what to do
and can just pull out the defense mechanisms it already developed when it was given the vaccine, and
curb the virus' numbers way way faster than it initially would have. This is effectively the same,
as if your body had already overcome a regular infection, mind you! The difference is that your body
never had to go through a serious regular infection by itself, which has way higher risks for
adverse effects than an infection post-vaccination. We will talk about this more in a bit...

The result of this - AND THIS IS THE TAKE HOME MESSAGE SO LISTEN UP - is that the virus has less
time and thus less chance to replicate itself in a vaccinated person, because the body can fight it
way faster and more efficiently. This means there are less new viruses being created with a chance
to gain a beneficial mutation. By vaccinating someone, we are doing EXACTLY what we discussed
earlier: We give the virus population less chance to roll their 'mutation die'. We are reducing
their dice pool. They have less dice to roll. We are DECREASING THE CHANCE FOR SOMETHING LIKE THE
DELTA VARIANT.

Apparently this line of arguments was 'incoherent' to this person I was talking to on twitter, and
maybe it was due to the limited format. This here is my good-faith effort to circumvent the
limitations of twitter and hammering this ONE. POINT. HOME. I cannot make this any clearer without
sitting you down in a class room and giving you a lecture.

## WHY VACCINES ARE IMPORTANT

So, let's try to wrap this up neatly - we still have a lot to cover after this...

How does a vaccine help us? Here are the most important benefits:

1. We are skipping the long initial infection. If the body fights the virus by itself, there's still
   a pretty good chance that it can beat it. The difference between the initial infection and a
   follow-up infection is that during that initial infection the body doesn't know what to do yet,
   so that infection is WAY longer than the follow-up infection. In this time, simply because there
   is MORE TIME before the immune system kills it off, the virus has more chances to replicate
   itself in the host. One thing this leads to is that transmissions to other hosts are easier,
   because the virus has more time to replicate itself and build up a higher viral load, before the
   immune system squashes it. The other thing is that, because it can replicate more, it HAS MORE
   CHANCES TO ROLL ITS FUCKING DIE. In turn, being vaccinated REDUCES THE CHANCES TO ROLL THE DIE
   BECAUSE IT HAS LESS TIME BEFORE IT GETS CRUSHED BY THE IMMUNE SYSTEM. WE ARE REDUCING ITS DICE
   POOL. WE ARE REDUCING THE CHANCE FOR ANOTHER MORE EFFECTIVE VARIANT TO POP UP.

2. The initial infection is the one carrying the most risk. And even if you aren't in the part of
   the population at serious risk, there is still SOME risk left. The vaccine now simply reduces
   this risk EVEN MORE. Where is the downside in that?

3. We are protecting those people that cannot get vaccinated without locking them out of normal
   life. With how much the vaccine reduces transmission rates, we can SIGNIFICANLTY drive down the
   risk of infection for people that cannot get the vaccine. Why? As I layed out earlier, if the
   virus doesn't have much time to replicate in your body because you are vaccinated, we are
   reducing its chance to build up a high enough viral load to infect someone else. Should we just
   lock people up in their homes when they have immune deficincies, especially when it's to no fault
   of their own? I'm not talking out of my ass, btw. We have the numbers:
   https://khub.net/documents/135939561/390853656/Impact+of+vaccination+on+household+transmission+of+SARS-COV-2+in+England.pdf/35bf4bb1-6ade-d3eb-a39e-9c9b25a8122a?t=1619601878136

   The TL;DR: Even just the first dosis of the Astra-Zeneca or the Pfizer vaccine already reduced
   transmission rates among household members by 50%. After ONE DOSIS.

That was the main part... Now, let's go over some of the major talking points, especially those that
were thrown at me by this wonderful fellow on twitter.

## THE DELTA VARIANT

Let's get easy stuff out of the way first: I've now seen multiple people argue that the delta
variant originated from the UK, and then they use that as an argument that the vaccine doesn't do
anything anyways, when the delta variant can pop up in a country with one of the hightest
vaccination rates across the globe. And it's WRONG. The delta variant was first identified in INDIA
( https://www.yalemedicine.org/news/5-things-to-know-delta-variant-covid ; quote: "A major worry
right now is Delta, a highly contagious SARS-CoV-2 virus strain, which was first identified in India
in December"), which is one the LEAST vaccinated countries outside of africa. It currently, as I am
writing this, has only managed to get 9.1% of its population vaccinated.

BUT LET'S ACTUALLY PLAY THIS HYPOTHETICAL. Could something like the Delta variant develop in the UK
too? Yes. Yes, it can. But having people vaccinated against Covid SEVERELY reduces this chance,
because - LET'S RUN THIS THE FUCK BACK TO THE BEGINNING - the virus has less CHANCES to roll their
'MUTATION DICE'. WE ARE, YET AGAIN, REDUCING DICE POOLS.

## Common arguments from people at least 'hesitant' about the vaccine

### "I'M NOT AT RISK, WHY SHOULD I CARE?"

If this was JUST about personal risk, I probably wouldn't care. If getting vaccinated only affects
the person getting the vaccine, and that's it, I don't know if I would have taken the vaccine yet.
UNFORTUNATELY, this isn't about you. This isn't about any of you self-centered, self-absorbed, 'muh
freedom' spouting bio-terrorists. This is about:

1. Protecting those people that CANNOT GET VACCINATED EVEN IF THEY WANTED TO. There are people out
   there, BORN with auto-immune disorders or general immune deficincies, that cannot get vaccinated
   because they are at actual serious risk of harm or death from getting a vaccine. If you are
   refusing the vaccine for only selfish reasons, you are putting these people at risk. For them,
   you are a ticking time bomb that can kill them by merely breathing in their general direction.

2. Curbing the chances for the virus to replicate, so we avert another delta variant. This SHOULD be
   the easiest point the understand, in my mind at least, but I've found that this incredibly hard
   for people to understand, for some reason. The dice analogy I've used throughout this wall of
   text is the only thing I've found decent success with, because dice are something people
   understand. Unfortunately, this requires some basic high school level understanding of statistics
   and evolution, and that's rarer than I would have thought. I THE VIRUS CANNOT REPLICATE AS OFTEN,
   IT ALSO CANNOT MUTATE AS OFTEN, THUS THE CHANCE FOR SOMETHING LIKE A DELTA VARIANT IS REDUCED,
   WHEN PEOPLE GET VACCINATED.

And if you're only at the so often touted 0.12% chance of dying from the virus, why in God's name
would not want to reduce that risk to 0.0018%? (source:
https://covid-101.org/science/how-many-people-have-died-from-the-vaccine-in-the-u-s/ )

### "BUT THE VACCINE CAN CAUSE SEIZURES"

First of all, after looking for it for 30 minutes, THERE SEEMS TO BE NO EVIDENCE FOR THE VACCINE
CAUSING LONG-TERM SEIZURES.

Generally, the vaccines can cause fever, and fevers can lower your so-called seizure threshold, but
only as long as the fever lasts. You know what an infection with the actual virus does? It can give
you a fever. And in case connecting two dots is too hard: Getting infected by the virus(!) has at
least(!) the same risk for TEMPORARY(!) seizures as getting the vaccines. Source:
https://www.epilepsy.com/learn/covid-19-and-epilepsy/covid-19-vaccination

### "BUT THE VACCINE HAS SIDE EFFECTS"

So does covid, and the risks and severity of the side effects from a covid infection are WAY WORSE
and MORE LIKELY compared to the vaccine.

Source:
https://www.healthline.com/health-news/vaccine-side-effects-vs-covid-19-damage-theres-no-comparison#The-serious-consequences-of-COVID-19

### "BUT VACCINATED PEOPLE CAN STILL GET SICK / SPREAD COVID"

No shit, sherlock. We know. We call those that still get full-blown covid despite being vaccinated
"breakthrough cases". These are the cases that will never go away, and are rooted mostly in the
efficency of the vaccine being below 100%. NO vaccine we ever developed in the history of medicine
was ever 100% effective. And yet, we still used them to great effectiveness to curb small pox,
measles, polio, and many many more.

The important point is that the LIKELIHOOD of getting sick and spreading the virus is reduced by
getting vaccinated.

Here's the absolute kicker. Someone screenshotted the headline of an article titled 'CDC report
shows vaccinated people can spread COVID-19' and then tried using that as an argument, but when you
actually READ the article, the FIRST LINE after the headline says 'Experts urge Americans to get
COVID-19 shots, say delta spreads as easily as chickenpox'. If you then continue reading it, you
find out, they were talking about BREAKTRHOUGH CASES. The BREAKTRHOUGH CASES can still spread covid
just like the unvaccinated. Which, as sad as it is, makes sense. They go through the regular
infection cycle, so of course they can spread the virus.

Speaking of which, the delta variant is not a BREAKTHROUGH VARIANT. There is no such thing as a
'BREAKTRHOUGH VARIANT'. There are variants, and then there are breakthrough cases; those are two
very different things. Unfortunately, in my discussion with this one person, I did also use that
term, albeit in a very different way. As I then explained to them, I mean 'breakthrough' in the
sense that the virus had a breakthrough. It managed to develop a new variant, and I called that a
'breakthrough', like you would call a scientific achievement a 'breakhthrough'.

What this ultimately comes down to is that: YES, vaccinated people CAN still spread the virus, but
at a SIGNIFICANLTY REDUCED RATE. That's the point...

### "BUT COVID IS ANIMAL BASED"

So apparently this argument is used to say that we can never really eradicate the virus, and it will
always be mutating, because it is animal based. Let's go through this one step at a time:

'we can never really eradicate the virus': Yes, we know. That's not news. We can also never really
eradicate the black plague, or rabies. We still are pretty successful combating rabies with
vaccines, aren't we?

'it will always be mutating'. Yes, also true. But if we just look at bats (or whatever animal this
corona virus ends up coming from), the virus has very little evolutionary pressure to develop new
variants that are STILL zoonotic. Not every mutation that makes it easier for it to spread between
bats also makes it easier to spread to and between humans. Those are seperate, maybe even mostly
OPPOSITE, evolutionary goals. Our immune systems are different enough that there's a good chance
that you cannot have your cake and eat it too.

This last part becomes even WORSE for the virus, if we're vaccinated, because now the evolutionary
path it needs to take in bats is longer than before. And the tricky part about evolutionary paths is
that they aren't straight. So we, yet again, severely reduce the chance of zoonotic transmission by
getting people vaccinated across the board. Now the virus has to figure how to circumvent the
vaccine, WITHOUT even encountering it directly (because when it does, the vaccine takes care of it).

Here is a list of interesting reads on this topic:

- https://www.intechopen.com/chapters/65912
- https://www.thepigsite.com/news/2021/07/why-vaccines-matter-in-the-fight-against-zoonotic-diseases
- https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7131227/

### "BUT WHAT ABOUT THE FLU"

This must be one of the best examples of the false equivalency fallasy in any modern discourse. Why?
Because the flu hasn't racked up over 600.000 deaths within just shy of half a year. And unlike with
the flu, we now have a vaccine that seems to be incredibly effective by any measure thinkable.

'but it is also mutating a lot'. Yep, still not as deadly (in most years). As long as we don't get a
'variant' that is as deadly as covid, this is an absolute moot point.

If you want to educate yourself on the actual similarities between the two:

- https://www.cdc.gov/flu/symptoms/flu-vs-covid19.htm
- https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/coronavirus/in-depth/coronavirus-vs-flu/art-20490339

### "BUT VACCINES MAKE THE VIRUS STRONGER"

There is zero evidence for this. Vaccines make it harder for a virus to spread and replicate. If it
cannot replicate, it has no chance to get stronger. I am still waiting for any form of evidence for
this point. So far, I've only been dissappointed.

### THE 'FAST CAR' ARGUMENT AND 'ARE MANDATES CONSTITUTIONAL?'

Here's my favourite. I quote:

"I'm under no obligation to protect you from every dangerous thing in the world. I drive a fast car.
Fast cars have a higher chance of killing you than a slow one does. I'm not going to stop driving my
car for your sensitive sense of safety"

This is, at its core, trying to be a 'muh freedom' argument. They don't want to give up fast cars,
because slow cars kill less people. Unfortunately it doesn't equate to vaccines even remotely. You
are absolutely allowed to drive fast cars, BUT you are not allowed to be NEGLIGENT.

I am goig to take American common law as the example, but as far as my reading on this goes, the
general principle seem to be same across the common law in general, and many other systems law.

To test, whether someone was acting negligently, the state in question tests whether the defendant
breached its Duty of Care. This Duty of Care is 'a legal obligation which is imposed on an
individual, requiring adherence to a standard of reasonable care while performing any acts that
could foreseeably harm others.'

It's an OBLIGATION. Driving a fast car does not make you negligent per se, but driving over the
speed limit in downtown is, because now you are putting people at an UNREASONABLE risk.

If we actually wanted to find equivalency here, and say that 'driving a fast car is like not taking
the vaccine', then you are still required to adhere to your duty of care. But then you would need to
argue that not taking the vaccine was still a reasonable act and wouldn't put other people under
unreasonable risk, and I wouldn't be surprised that this line of argument (not taking the vaccine is
putting people at unreasonable risk) would be used by a court, when we actually end up receiving
mandates and people start sueing the state(s) or the federal government over it.

So I guess the question is, if the government, whether that's the federal government or the states,
starts mandating vaccines (for people without medical excemption), are they legally allowed to do
so. Would this be constitutional? Lucky for us, there is precedent!

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jacobson_v._Massachusetts

This case was upheld in 1905, where Cambrige pastor Henning Jacobson refused to take the smallpox
vaccine, after the Board of Health of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts started mandating that
vaccine in 1902, fining anyone who refused. This case went all the way up to the United States
Supreme Court, which held that "in every well ordered society charged with the duty of conserving
the safety of its members the rights of the individual in respect of his liberty may at times, under
the pressure of great dangers, be subjected to such restraint, to be enforced by reasonable
regulations, as the safety of the general public may demand" and that "[r]eal liberty for all could
not exist under the operation of a principle which recognizes the right of each individual person to
use his own [liberty], whether in respect of his person or his property, regardless of the injury
that may be done to others."

The source of that quote, by the way: https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/197/11/

With that quote, what the court said comes down to one thing that is true in at least all western
countries that I know of: Your liberties end at the point where you're harming the freedoms of
others. There are even a couple of examples that are probably pretty easy to understand, for
example: I am pretty allowed to be whereever I want, but I cannot trespass on your property, because
now I am breaching your freedom to choose who is allowed on your property.

What this means for diseases and vaccines is this: You have the liberty to decide what goes into
your body and what doesn't, but EVERYONE else has the right to not live in a world plagued by
disease. Now, a mandate like this wouldn't make sense for any vaccine, but for the one that was been
killing well over half a million people in just over a year, I can see the government arguing for it
and courts agreeing.

But, as was pointed out to me, this might end in revolts, if these mandates come into effect. My
hope is that the portion of vaccinated people that are so dug in to their stance that they would
actually revolt is fairly small, but I guess we'll see about that.
